---
layout: post
title: Choosing a PhD in the basic sciences
subtitle: Featuring twists and tales from someone who's been there
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [phd, careers]
comments: true
---

This post is for penultimate or final year undergraduate or Master's degree students who are interested in pursuing a PhD. When I was choosing my PhD, I had a lot of questions about the logistics of pursuing (and doing) a PhD. I learned the answers to some of these questions by asking others, but most of the time these answers were gained by stumbling through the whole process. And now having completed that process, I thought it would be great to have a centralised location to post the answers to questions I had, and the questions I've received from prospective students since. 

In contrast to the undergraduate degree, which many view as a means of staying competitive on the job market, a PhD degree is a highly specialised one, and getting one is time-consuming. Given that PhD degrees haven't become mainstream to the same extent undergraduate degrees have, the decision to pursue a PhD degree is an individual and context-specific one. Already, there are many great blogposts on [whether or not to pursue a PhD](blog1) and [what factors to consider](blog2). Thus, I defer to those excellent resources on those questions and here instead share my take on other PhD-related questions that I've heard during my studies. Think about whether you agree or disagree with my thoughts; either way, I hope this post gives some insight into what the PhD process is like and helps you identify what you consider important, if you decide to pursue a PhD degree.

[Packing for a long journey](pre-travel_prep_image)

# What is a PhD like?
A PhD is a doctoral degree in which you conduct research to explore a specific research question. The length of the degree varies; in the UK where I did my graduate studies, this takes three to four years, but it can last as long as six years in other countries. The research question you explore during your PhD may be pre-defined by your supervisor or be one that you proposed yourself. Usually, you'll have a progress review during your PhD to check that you have a feasible plan to conduct your research and that you have the support to perform it. At the end of the PhD, you'll compile your analyses and findings into a cohesive, well-structured thesis that is assessed in a _viva voce_, or viva. Depending on which country you're in, the viva may either take place in a room with two other examiners, or it may take on a presentation format followed by questions from your examiners and from a wider audience. (I defended my thesis in a Zoom meeting with two examiners thanks to covid, but I hope that by the time you finish your PhD you'll get the full viva experience!)

The PhD process is designed to be straightforward, and the university you study at should have advisory boards and committees to ensure it is so. But your personal experience will probably feel more like a rollercoaster. The frustrating lows caused by imperfect study design or imperfect results will be equally matched by the rewarding highs of mastering a new technique or discovering something unexpected. The realisation I've had as a PhD student, and talking to many others, is that the PhD experience differs by project and by environment, meaning that the overall experience is highly variable. This can be a scary prospect, but one that can be countered by identifying specific goals for your research and for your own personal development.

# How do I choose a PhD topic?

There are many reasons why you might choose one scientific discipline over another; in my view, these can broadly be classed as 'interest' versus 'pragmaticism'. I feel that personally, my answer is evenly divided between the two categories, and goes as follows:

> "During my studies, I developed an interest in how diseases develop. Metabolism is highly responsive to genetics as well as environmental factors, and many studies have shown that diseases like type 2 diabetes and heart disease are accompanied by changes in metabolism. This means that by studying metabolism and metabolic pathways, we can identify potential risk factors and molecular targets that indicate or lead to disease. I also learned during my Master's degree that thanks to recent technological advances and novel statistical methods, we can also study metabolism in health and disease in large groups of people. As a biologist and a lab-based scientist by training, my academic interest, coupled with the opportunity to learn and apply new and relevant techniques in my research, led me to pursue a PhD in Metabolic and Cardiovascular Disease."

If I had asked the me of ten years ago this question, past me would have declared 'interest!' without hesitancy. But 'interest' has dragged me across the gamut of biological sciences, from zoology and evolutionary biology, to plant-pathogen interactions, to gut bacteria, then finally to population genetics and metabolism in health and disease. But while my interests influenced the navigation direction, it was the logistics - such as career prospects, project availabilities, lab group culture, or research opportunities - that influenced the steering. 

Many prospective PhD students I've talked to have cited interest as a concern; not because they lack it, but rather, because they are interested in too many different areas, and that paralyses them. I would advise those bright and curious minds to be unafraid to take steps to pursue their interests - talk to scientists in the field, read some scientific papers, or get your hands dirty during a summer internship. And don't be afraid to let logistics guide your decision, because humans are naturally curious creatures and interest can be developed by delving into the challenging questions.

[Really, it's amazing that humans are naturally curious and that shoving information at them only makes them demand more!](phdstudentcomic)

# What factors do I consider when choosing a PhD?
-again, many posts on the subject, the common factors are...
-but which are the most important? Depends on your personal situation
-first year versus during/final year PhD: the balance shifted (describe experiment that Enrico did on us)

# Do I need previous experience in a field for my PhD?
-NO (personal winding journey)
-BUT you must be able to justify your reasons for wanting to pursue a PhD in that particular field

# Does doing a PhD mean I have to a scientific researcher for the rest of my life?

Okay I admit, this question was deliberately hyperbolic so I could give it a resounding, "NO!". No, no, NO, doing a PhD doesn't mean you are only qualified to do scientific research as a career! 


