---
layout: post
title: Choosing a PhD in the basic sciences
subtitle: Featuring twists and tales from someone who's been there
tags: [phd, careers]
category: PhD_reflections
---

Starting from Kindergarten, you progress as a curious child through primary school. Secondary school and its onslaught of exams beats some of the love for learning out of you, but if you're reading this, you probably had enough academic passion left in you to proceed to university. So here you are, a penultimate or final year undergraduate, with a XX of coursework and exams looming before you. But beyond those trials lies a wealth of opportunities and promise. There's so much you could do, it's almost paralysing.

If you've pursued a degree in basic sciences, your professors will almost certainly have dangled the lure of a PhD degree before you. The appeal is real: academia is a natural progression, and a graduate degree would look great on your CV. Of course, there are many better and valid reasons as to why you might want to pursue a PhD. There are plenty of great blogposts about [whether or not you should pursue one](1). 

So why am I still rambling on here? Because I've been there before. Because chances are, even after your epiphany, you may still have many questions about a PhD. After reading many posts on the subject and having talked to several prospective students, I want to share my take on common questions and concerns I hear and share personal anecdotes that I hope some of you will find (somewhat) helpful in your own considerations.

[Here we go again...](veteran_look_gif)

# What is a PhD like?
A PhD is a doctoral degree in which you conduct research to explore a specific research question. The length of the degree varies; in the UK, where I did my graduate studies, this takes three to four years, but can last as long as six years in other countries. The research question you explore during your PhD may have been pre-defined by your supervisor or be one that you proposed yourself. Usually, you'll have a progress review during your PhD to check that you have a feasible plan to conduct your research and that you have the support to perform it. At the end of the PhD, you'll compile your analyses and findings into a cohesive, well-structured thesis that is assessed in a _viva voce_, or oral defence.

The PhD process is designed to be straightforward, and the university you study at should have advisory boards and committees to ensure it is so. But your personal experience will probably feel more like a rollercoaster. The frustrating lows caused by imperfect study design or imperfect results will be equally matched by the rewarding highs of mastering a new technique or discovering something unexpected. The realisation I've had as a PhD student, and talking to many others, is that the PhD experience differs by project and by environment, meaning that the overall experience is highly variable. This can be a scary prospect, but one that can be countered by identifying specific goals for your research and for your own personal development.

# How do I select a field to work in?
-pragmaticism (personal experience I had a choice between lab-based and computational work)

Of course, in order to do a PhD in a certain field you need to be interested in that field to begin with. But I find that at the secondary school and university levels, it's not so much the case that students have a lack of interest in any one field, but rather, a glut of interest across multiple fields. To those bright and curious minds, I would advise them to take advantage of internship schemes wherever possible. Students in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) are sought after by many companies, and it's also possible to reach out to companies asking if they are willing to take on an intern for a few months. Even if you don't enjoy the position, you can now eliminate one area from your list, and the experience will look great on your CV anyway.

[Really, it's amazing that humans are naturally curious and that shoving information at them only makes them demand more!](phdstudentcomic)

Another important factor to consider is pragmaticism. What techniques and analyses will you learn and apply during your PhD, and are they transferrable or applicable in your future career? 

# What factors do I consider when choosing a PhD?
-again, many posts on the subject, the common factors are...
-but which are the most important? Depends on your personal situation
-first year versus during/final year PhD: the balance shifted (describe experiment that Enrico did on us)

# Do I need previous experience in a field for my PhD?
-NO (personal winding journey)
-BUT you must be able to justify your reasons for wanting to pursue a PhD in that particular field

# Does doing a PhD mean I have to a scientific researcher for the rest of my life?
-hyperbolic question - no!


